---
layout: post.hbs

title: Are we getting too Sassy?
url: are-we-getting-too-sassy
description: "A look at the trend of abusing Sass for micro-optimisation"

posted: 2014-05-05T10:00

post:
- post

published: false

categories:
  - "Web Development"
  - "Sass"

---

{{#markdown}}

Before I begin, a disclaimer; I love using Sass.  I use it everyday in my front-end workflow and know that my productivity would suffer if it were taken away.  It’s an awesome tool and one that has truly pushed CSS standards forward.

However, [a recent A List Apart article](http://alistapart.com/article/dry-ing-out-your-sass-mixins) confirmed what had been niggling away at me for a little while now.

Are we abusing the power of Sass to perform pre-processing micro optimisations that shouldn't be done in the first place?

Case in point – in the above article Sam actually nails some really great points on some simple ways to DRY out your Sass.  Placeholder selectors can be very useful.  I don’t personally use `@extend` too much, but I don’t have a problem with anyone else using it and can see it’s value in certain circumstances.

But reading further, he shows how to dry out a mixin to the point where we have the following Sass:

### Sass

	$Placeholder-Selectors: ();

	@mixin button($color, $extend: true) {
		@include button-static($extend);

		background-color: $color;
		border-color: mix(black, $color, 25%);

		&:hover {
			background-color: mix(black, $color, 15%);
			border-color: mix(black, $color, 40%);
		}
	}

	@mixin button-static($extend: true) {
		$button-selector: map-get($Placeholder-Selectors, 'button');

		@if $extend == true {
			@if $button-selector == null {
				$button-selector: unique-id();
				$Placeholder-Selectors: map-merge($Placeholder-Selectors, ('button': $button-selector)) !global;

				@at-root %#{$button-selector} {
					@include button-static(false);
				}
			}
			@extend %#{$button-selector};
			}
			@else {
			border: 1px solid;
			border-radius: 5px;
			padding: .25em .5em;

			&:hover {
				cursor: pointer;
			}
		}
	}

Which can be used in the following way:

### Sass

	.button-badass {
		@include button(#b4d455);
	}

	.button-coffee {
		@include button(#c0ffee);
	}

	.button-decaff {
		@include button(#decaff);
	}

### CSS

	.button-badass {
		background-color: #b4d455;
		border-color: #879f3f;
	}
	.button-badass,
	.button-coffee,
	.button-decaff {
		border: 1px solid;
		border-radius: 5px;
		padding: .25em .5em;
	}
	.button-badass:hover,
	.button-coffee:hover,
	.button-decaff:hover {
		cursor: pointer;
	}
	.button-badass:hover {
		background-color: #99b448;
		border-color: #6c7f33;
	}

	.button-coffee {
		background-color: #c0ffee;
		border-color: #90bfb2;
	}
	.button-coffee:hover {
		background-color: #a3d8ca;
		border-color: #73998e;
	}

	.button-decaff {
		background-color: #decaff;
		border-color: #a697bf;
	}
	.button-decaff:hover {
		background-color: #bcabd8;
		border-color: #857999;
	}

Now don’t get me wrong, creating a mixin that can do this is hugely skilled.  It does exactly what Sam wrote it to do, and it's uber DRY.  Mission accomplished right?

But here-in lies my problem with it – I took one look at it and it scared the crap out of me.  Actually, it still does and I've looked at it a dozen of times now.  If I took over maintaining a project and all the Sass looked as complex as that, I’d feel a little out of my depth maintaining the code.

I certainly don’t consider myself a Sass noob either; I've been using it for over 2 years and feel that I can do everything I need to to make great websites.

So is this my problem for not being good enough at Sass?  Should we all be chasing this level of DRY-ness in our code?

In my opinion, I don’t think it is and I don’t think we should be.

As much as I'd love to be able to write Sass as skilled as this, I don’t feel like there’s any need for me to do so.

One of CSS's biggest strengths in my opinion is it’s simplicity.  Sass has proved beyond doubt that there are some areas in which the basic language can be improved upon, but abstracting CSS to such a level that it becomes almost unintelligible to anyone but expert users of a preprocessor isn’t one of them.

Part of our job is to write maintainable code so that should we get hit by a bus on the way to work, someone else could pick up the project with as low a barrier to entry as possible.  If we're making CSS this complex simply to save a couple of lines surplus code, this seems counter productive.  It equates to golfing your JavaScript in a style seen in the JS1k competitions.  It’s an amazing skill to have, as well as being fun to do, but I doubt many of the entrants would build maintainable website JavaScript in a similar way.

So before we all start attempting to create the most fantastical mixins the world has ever seen all in the name of achieving DRY-er CSS, take a step back and think of the DRY-est form of CSS; CSS itself.

If you find you are duplicating selectors to the point of needing a mixin, go ahead and create one.  But don’t micro-optimise that mixin to the n-th degre if it means only you will understand how to modify it.  If you are compressing and gzipping your CSS the savings will be so minimal it isn’t worth it.  Gzip actually goes to town on repetitive code, in the same way that inline media queries aren’t something people lose sleep about using.



{{/markdown}}